---
layout: post.html
title: "Part 0: Setup"
tags: [DataViz]
---

Initial setup for our Data Visualization Tutorial.


<div class="well">
<b>IMPORTANT</b>: Please be sure to work through the <a href="{{ get_url("/begin/setup-your-machine")}}">machine setup</a> before proceeding.
</div>


<div class="well">
<b>Need to cheat a bit?</b> The complete Data Viz scripts can be found in <a href="https://github.com/econchick/new-coder/tree/master/dataviz"><code>new-coder/dataviz</code></a>.
</div>

Change into the Data Viz project:

```bash
$ cd new-coder/dataviz
```


Make sure you’ve installed [virtualenvwrapper](http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenvwrapper) and followed the steps from the [machine setup]({{ get_url("/begin/setup-your-machine")}}) to set up your terminal correctly.
.
To make a virtual environment specific to your Data Viz project, run the following command. You should see `(DataVizProj)` before your prompt.

```bash
$ mkvirtualenv DataVizProj
(DataVizProj)$
```
* Now we will install the package requirements for this project. Your virtual environment will store the required packages in a self-contained area to not mess up with other Python projects.

```bash
(DataVizProj) $ pip install -r requirements.txt
```
<div class="well">
<b>NOTE</b>: Sometimes, NumPy is finicky. If the previous step returns errors, try the following:
<pre><code>
(DataVizProj)$ pip install numpy
(DataVizProj)$ pip install matplotlib
(DataVizProj)$ pip install geojson
</code></pre>
</div>

## Finicky matplotlib doesn't install?

Sometimes, `matplotlib` is finicky as well. If you are on a Mac or Linux, and `pip install matplotlib` did not work, you are probably missing the supporting packages `zlib`, `freetype2` and `libpng`. Windows users do not need to worry about this as these packages are already included in the standard matplotlib Windows installers.

To install (order of installation is important here):

### ZLIB

1. Go to [zlib’s site](http://www.zlib.net/) and download the latest source code archive.
2. Scroll down to zlib source code, and download the latest current release in `tar.gz` format
3. Unpack the downloaded file by double-clicking to open it up.
4. Open your terminal, and type as follows:

```bash
$ cd ~/Downloads  # or whichever directory the downloaded file was saved into
$ cd zlib-x.y.z  # whatever the version is you downloaded
$ ./configure
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

### LIBPNG

1. Navigate to the [libpng site](http://www.libpng.org/pub/png/libpng.html).
2. Scroll down and download the latest version of `libpng`  by clicking the `tar.gz` link on the `Source Code` row.
3. Unpack the `tar.gz` file by double-clicking to open it up.
4. Open your terminal, and type as follows:

```bash
$ cd ~/Downloads  # or whichever directory the downloaded file was saved into
$ cd libpng-x.y.z  # whatever the version is you downloaded
$ ./configure
$ make
$ make check
$ sudo make install
```

### FREETYPE

1. Navigate to [freetype’s sourcforge page](http://sourceforge.net/projects/freetype/files/latest/download?source=files). The download of the source file should shart automatically.
2. Unpack the file by double-clicking to open.
3. Open your terminal, and type as follows:

```bash
$ cd ~/Downloads  # or whichever directory the downloaded file was saved into
$ cd freetype-x.y.z  # whatever the version is you downloaded
$ ./configure
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

After installing these three packages, try typing `pip install matplotlib` in your *activated* virtualenv, `(DataVizProj)` and it should work.


* Test the installation real quick by starting up the Python interpreter:

```python
(DataVizProj)$ python
>>> import numpy
>>> import matplotlib
>>> import geojson
```
* If you have no errors (you would just see the `>>>` prompt), then you’re good to go. You can close out of the Python interpreter by pressing `CTRL+D`. If you do have errors, I’d try downloading [numpy](http://scipy.org/Download) and [matplotlib](http://matplotlib.org/downloads.html) manually.

<nav>
  <ul class="pager">
    <li class="previous"><a href="{{ get_url('/dataviz/intro/') }}"><span aria-hidden="true">&larr;</span> Introduction</a></li>
    <li class="next"><a href="{{ get_url('/dataviz/part-1/') }}">Part 1: Parsing Data <span aria-hidden="true">&rarr;</span></a></li>
  </ul>
</nav>

